# fluoridation-birth-outcomes

These data and scripts accompany the paper D. E. Goin, A. M. Padula, T. J. Woodruff, A. Sherris, K. Charbonneau, R. Morello-Frosch. Water fluoridation and birth outcomes in California. Please cite this paper if you use the data in any published work.

Since 1998 water systems have been required to test and report levels of several chemicals including fluoride to consumers as part of the Consumer Confidence Report Rule amendment to the Safe Drinking Water Act. This usually means a hard copy brochure of the consumer confidence report is mailed to customers. The data are not compiled into electronic databases and record keeping among water system administrators varies substantially. The US EPA compiles consumer confidence reports in the Safe Drinking Water Information System (SDWIS) system; however, only the most recent years are available. To compile a database of historical water fluoride levels from 2000-2018, we used all publicly available data, and we filed Freedom of Information Act requests to individual water systems for the consumer confidence reports for years that were missing data. Consumer confidence reports provide fluoride levels measured at specific water sources (e.g., a water intake or treatment plant) and/or system average concentrations. They also distinguish between naturally-occurring and treatment-related fluoride levels. To determine the average level of fluoride in a given water system and year, we used the level of fluoride reported in the consumer confidence report if only one water source was reported. If only the treatment-related level of fluoride was provided, we used this level. If only the naturally occurring level of fluoride is provided, we used this level. If more than one water source was listed, but an average for the system was listed, we used the average level reported. If more than one water source was listed, and no system average was reported, but there were percentages listed for each water source, we created weighted averages using the percentages reported. If more than one water source was listed, no system average was reported, and no percentages were listed for each water source, we created a simple average between the sources. If only a range was reported, we used the median of the range. If only a range or no data were available, but a value of average annual fluoride levels was listed on the data provided on the California Water Board website, we used that level. If levels were missing for a year, but prior year levels were available, we carried those levels forward. We assumed non-detected fluoride levels were the limit of detection for the purpose of reporting (0.1 ppm) divided by the square root of two. Of the total 12,733 water system-years included, 959 (7.5%) were non-detected or were an average of a detected and non-detected fluoride level. For the water systems and years we included in the study, 8,251 (64.8%) had fluoride levels directly from the consumer confidence report, 2,114 (16.6%) had a simple average of fluoride levels from two or more sources in the consumer confidence report, 1,935 (15.2%) had a weighted average of source levels from the consumer confidence report, 229 (1.8%) used the California Water Board level, 153 (1.2%) used a median of a range reported on the consumer confidence report, and 38 (0.3%) used a weighted average of sources from a personal communication with someone who worked at the water system. Of the 546 water systems included in this analysis, there were 349 small or medium water systems (less than 10,000 connections) and 196 large water systems (10,000 or more connections).

The scripts demonstrate how we estimated the effects of hypothetical interventions to reduce drinking water fluoride levels on the risk of adverse birth outcomes in California from 2000-2018.

